The Mono Debugger - 0.2.2 "Cambridge"
======================================

This is mostly a bug-fix release, but it also contains a few new
features.  See the NEWS file for details.

About the Mono Debugger
-----------------------

The Mono Debugger is a graphical debugger which is written in C#.  It
can debug both native and managed applications and it has a graphical
and a text-mode user interface.

At the moment, the debugger only works on the i386 architecture
running either a Linux 2.2.x or 2.4.x kernel or FreeBSD 4.7.
Most likely, the debugger also works on OpenBSD, but I don't have an
OpenBSD system to test it.

You can debug any single-threaded and multi-threaded managed
applications (unmanaged multi-threaded applications are also
supported, but a few restrictions apply in this case).

Design Goals
------------

The debugger was designed to be modular and portable to other systems.
However, when we started this project, we were already short on time
so the backend is currently only implemented on the i386 architecture
running either a Linux or BSD kernel.

Our main idea was to write a debugger for managed applications, but
still being able to debug unmanaged applications such as the JIT if
necessary.  However, due to the limited time we had on our hands,
support for unmanaged applications is still a bit preliminary; it
should be enough for a hacker to fix a bug, but it's way too
uncomfortable for an ordinary user.

Unlike other debugger GUI's, the debugger does not talk to an external
debugger application such as gdb, but does everything itself.

Thanks
------

First of all, I'd like to thank Ximian, Inc. which is a wonderful
company to work for and Miguel de Icaza who helped me a lot this
summer.  Without them, this project wouldn't have become possible.

I really appreciated hacking on this and it is a lot of fun to see my
"baby" grow and develop :-)

Limitations
-----------

Ok, before promising too much, let's start with the limitations ;-)

At the moment, the debugger only works on the i386 architecture.
Despite its modular design, it's probably a huge task to port it to
another hardware architecture.

When we started the project, I originally wrote the backend just for
Linux 2.2.x, but while doing the FreeBSD port I realized how easy it
was to do this - so the debugger can probably be ported to all flavors
of BSD with very little effort.

The only limitation is that the operating system must support
kernel-level threads and you must use them in glib and the runtime.
This is explained a bit more detailed in README.FreeBSD.

When debugging unmanaged applications, you cannot view any parameters
or local variables.  This is because the code to read the type
information from a DWARF 2 symbol file is not yet written.  At the
moment, you need to use the HexEditor together with the method's
disassembly and register viewer ......

At the moment, you cannot modify parameters or local variables.  To do
this right, we need to write an expression parser, but this takes some
time to implement.

Currently we cannot store the module list and breakpoints to disk
because serialization support in Mono is not yet mature enough.

The user interface still needs some loving.

Features
--------

* Single Stepping Engine

The single stepping engine is responsible for single-stepping,
stopping and continuing the target and getting notifications when the
target hit a breakpoint.

At the moment, the single stepping engine (class/SingleSteppingEngine.cs) can

  - step one machine instruction
  - step one machine instruction while stepping over method calls
  - step until the end of the current method
  - step until leaving a range of source lines (this includes stepping
    until reaching another source line)
  - step one source line
  - step one source line while stepping over method calls
  - step one source line while stepping over method calls, but only if
    the method is in a  user-configurable list of modules (shared libs, dlls)

When debugging managed applications, the single stepping engine can also

  - automatically trigger a JIT compilation of methods while single-stepping.

    This is done completely trasparently for the user, so you don't
    need to worry about JIT trampolines, not even when stepping one
    machine instruction, they'll be invisible for you like system
    calls.

  - insert a breakpoint on a method which is not yet JITed.

  - call a method in the target (but this is still very
    preliminar; due to the lacking expression parser we
    can't create the parameters yet).

    However, this is already used to call a property's getter and
    Object.ToString().

The single stepping engine supports debugging multi-threaded
applications; a stepping operation in one thread does not affect any
of the other threads.  This means for instance that it is safe to
insert a breakpoint on a method which is called by another thread.

* Breakpoints

Breakpoints can be used in managed and unmanaged methods.  You can
insert a breakpoint either for a method or for a source line.

When inserting the breakpoint for a method, it'll be inserted on the
instruction immediately following the method's prologue.  So when the
breakpoint it hit, the method's parameters can already be accessed.

Breakpoints may be inserted for not-yet-JITed methods, the debugger
will automatically insert the breakpoint when the method is JITed.
When inserting the breakpoints by source line, it'll also re-lookup
its address each time the method is JITed.  This allows the JIT to
create different code for the method each time it JITs it and
breakpoints will still be working.

The user interface may supply its own breakpoint handler class which
may be used to implement conditional breakpoints; such a conditional
breakpoint can also read parameters and local variables to decide
whether to continue the target.

Breakpoints can be inserted on a per-thread level, this means that a
breakpoint will only "break" on the "correct" thread.  This is very
important when debugging system functions such as corlib.

* Modules

Each shared library and each dll appears as a module to the debugger.
The user may configure whether to enter a module's methods while
single-stepping and load/unload the module's symbol tables.

The module list persists across multiple invocations of the same
target; later on we can even synchronize it to disk - as well as the
user's breakpoint settings.

* Parameters and local variables

Type support for managed types is almost complete.  The debugger can
already read all fundamental types, arrays, structs and classes.  It
can call a property's getter method and invoke an object's ToString()
method.

* Disassembly and processor registers

The debugger has a CPU view to see a disassembly of the current method
and view/modify the processor registers.  There's also a hex editor to
view/modify the target's memory.

* Hex Editor

The debugger has a hex editor to inspect or modify the target's memory.

* Command line interface

In addition to the graphical user interface, the debugger also has a
textual command line interface (which is also available in the GUI).

The command line interface has a few very cool features which the
GUI does not have:

- when debugging multi-threaded applications, you can debug all
  threads, not just the main thread.  This includes single-stepping,
  getting stack frames and backtraces etc. for any of the other
  threads.

- all commands are synchronous, especially the stepping commands;
  the debugger waits until the target has stopped again.

- you can access variables from any stack frame, not just from the
  current one.

- there's a (still very simple) expression evaluator which allows
  you to inspect local variables and parameters.

- it can be used as regression test suite.


March 4th, 2003
Martin Baulig <martin@ximian.com>
